# RFC #72: Address space overrides

## Summary

The goal of this RFC is to enable web platform tests to cover the
[CORS-RFC1918](https://wicg.github.io/cors-rfc1918) specification entirely.
More specifically, to enable tests to exercise user agent behavior in the face
of responses served from `local`, `private` and `public`
[address spaces](https://wicg.github.io/cors-rfc1918#address-space).

This is achieved by passing command-line flags to the browser under test forcing
it to artificially consider specific IP addresses `local`, `private` or
`public`.

This RFC aims to fix
[web-platform-tests/wpt#26166](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/issues/26166).

## Details

### Address allocation

For the purposes of testing, declare that the following subnets are not `local`
but instead:

* 127.1.0.0/16: `private`
* 127.2.0.0/16: `public`

### Browser changes

A new command-line flag (or a collection thereof) is added to each browser (it
need not be uniform, though that would certainly help with implementation) that
allows overriding the address space derived from specific IP addresses. For
example:

```sh
--test-override-address-space=127.1.0.0/16:private,127.2.0.0/16:public
```

Test-only code wires this command-line flag to the code in the browser under
test that determines the address space of a network endpoint.

### Test runner changes

The web platform test runner sets command-line flags on browsers such that the
browsers implement the custom address space mapping described above during
tests.

Corresponding entries are added to the hosts file, as generated by
[make_hosts_file()](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/blob/master/tools/serve/serve.py#L513-L530):

```
127.1.0.1 private.web-platform.test
127.2.0.1 public.web-platform.test
```

This allows web platform tests to exercise browser behavior in the face of
`private` and `public` IP addresses, simply by targeting the above domains.

## Risks

If the tests run on an IPv6-only system, the system might not know how to route
requests to the IPv4 loopback address range? This seems like an extremely remote
possibility, in which case many other assumptions made by the test framework
might have to be revisited anyway.

## Alternatives considered

### Use individual IP addresses

Same as above, but allow overriding address spaces per IP address instead of
per subnet.

The marginal difficulty of overriding per subnet seems low, and provides plenty
of test IP addresses to exercise intra-address-space, cross-ip-address requests,
which might come in handy [in the
future](https://github.com/WICG/cors-rfc1918/pull/1#issuecomment-721110250).

### Use real IP addresses

If we need to test user agent behavior in the face of a variety of IP addresses,
then... just do it!

This approach would have the web platform test runner configure additional
loopback network devices and assign them `private` and `public` IP addresses.
Then we could configure the hosts file to resolve specific domains to those IP
addresses, and test the whole shebang end to end.

This approach's main pro is that it truly is an end to end test of the feature,
exercising production code to its full extent. By virtue of requiring no
test-only hooks, it also requires no work on the part of browser developers.

Its main con is that it requires the test runner to have system privileges.
Additionally, it requires work to support for each test execution environment.
Finally, it arguably requires the purchase of a public IP address for our use,
in order to avoid running into conflicts someday down the road.

### Extend WebDriver

This alternative was initially recommended by @stephenmcgruer in
[web-platform-tests/wpt#26166](https://github.com/web-platform-tests/wpt/issues/26166).

The gist of this alternative is this: extend WebDriver to allow overriding
the address space derived from specific IP addresses or domains.

Its main pro is that such an approach would be standardized at a higher level
than web platform tests alone.

I reached out to some WebDriver experts to explore this avenue first. I was
informed that WebDriver's audience is web developers seeking to test their
creations rather than browser developers. As such, they recommended a simpler
approach with command-line flags instead.
